1

RailVQA: A Benchmark and Framework for Efficient Interpretable
Visual Cognition in Automatic Train Operation
Sen Zhang, Runmei Li, Shizhuang Deng, Zhichao Zheng, Yuhe Zhang, Jiani Li, Kailun Zhang, Tao Zhang,
Wenjun Wu, and Qunbo Wang*

Abstract—As Automatic Train Operation (ATO) advances
toward GoA4 and beyond, it increasingly depends on efficient,
reliable cab-view visual perception and decision-oriented inference to ensure safe operation in complex and dynamic railway
environments. However, existing approaches focus primarily on
basic perception and often generalize poorly to rare yet safetycritical corner cases. They also lack the high-level reasoning
and planning capabilities required for operational decisionmaking. Although recent Large Multi-modal Models (LMMs)
show strong generalization and cognitive capabilities, their use in
safety-critical ATO is hindered by high computational cost and
hallucination risk. Meanwhile, reliable domain-specific benchmarks for systematically evaluating cognitive capabilities are
still lacking. To address these gaps, we introduce RailVQAbench, the first VQA benchmark for cab-view visual cognition
in ATO, comprising 20,000 single-frame and 1,168 video based
QA pairs to evaluate cognitive generalization and interpretability
in both static and dynamic scenarios. Furthermore, we propose
RailVQA-CoM, a collaborative large–small model framework
that combines small-model efficiency with large-model cognition via a transparent three-module architecture and adaptive
temporal sampling, improving perceptual generalization and
enabling more efficient reasoning and planning. Experiments
demonstrate that the proposed approach substantially improves
performance, enhances interpretability, improves efficiency, and
strengthens cross-domain generalization in autonomous driving
systems. Code and datasets will be available at https://cybereyebjtu.github.io/RailVQA.html.
Index Terms—Autonomous driving, Rail transportation, Computer vision, Artificial Intelligence, Large Multi-modal Models.

I. I NTRODUCTION

D

ESPITE increasingly standardized railway operating procedures, serious safety incidents—such as collisions and
derailments caused by track intrusions, signal misinterpretation, or switch misalignment—remain challenging to prevent
entirely [1]. One contributing factor is the sustained high
attentional workload placed on human drivers, which increases
the likelihood of perception errors and delayed responses.
Against this backdrop, Automatic Train Operation (ATO) has
become essential for advancing automation and promoting

This work was supported by the Beijing Natural Science Foundation under
Grant L252146. (Corresponding author: Qunbo Wang)
Sen Zhang, Runmei Li, Zhichao Zheng, Yuhe Zhang, Jiani Li,
Kailun Zhang, and Qunbo Wang are with the School of Automation
and Intelligence, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100091, China (e-mail:
szhang02004@outlook.com; rmli@bjtu.edu.cn; zczheng7901@163.com;
24201025@bjtu.edu.cn; 24332036@bjtu.edu.cn; 24201023@bjtu.edu.cn;
wangqb6@outlook.com).
Shizhuang Deng and Tao Zhang are with the School of Software,
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China (e-mail: dengshizhuang@mail.nwpu.edu.cn; tao zhang@nwpu.edu.cn).
Wenjun Wu is with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University,
Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: wwj09315@buaa.edu.cn).

the sustainable development of modern railway systems [2].
Meanwhile, rapid advances in artificial intelligence have enabled the deployment of a range of driving-assistance functionalities. Yet the safety-critical nature of railway operations
demands exceptional reliability, interpretability, and rigorous
pre-deployment validation. This underscores the need for more
intelligent train driving-assistance systems, together with a
benchmark for their systematic evaluation.
Previous railway studies, such as RailSem19 [3], OSDaR23 [4], and RailGoerl24 [5], largely target low-level
perception tasks (e.g., semantic segmentation, object detection,
et.al). Although effective in controlled experimental settings,
they are often task-specific and lack of high-level cognition,
therefore generalize poorly to diverse and complex real-world
scenarios. Serious safety incidents are often caused by rare
long-tail anomalies rather than routine conditions, motivating a
shift from basic perception to higher-level, open-world hazard
cognition with robust generalization.
Recent advances in Large Multi-modal Models
(LMMs) [6]–[8] offer a promising pathway to address
these limitations. LMMs exhibit strong open-domain visual
understanding and high-level reasoning capabilities, enabling
autonomous systems to interpret dynamic environments,
anticipate potential hazards, and perform rule-grounded scene
understanding. Furthermore, techniques such as Chain-ofThought (CoT) reasoning [9] enhance inference reliability by
explicitly structuring intermediate reasoning steps, thereby
improving cognitive transparency.
Nevertheless, the direct deployment of LMMs in ATO
presents substantial practical challenges. First, the inherent
black-box nature of such models often results in hallucinated
reasoning [10], [11]. Moreover, processing dense, continuous
video streams with LMMs can incur relatively high computational overhead, which may make it challenging to satisfy
the time-sensitivity needs of safety-critical railway operations,
particularly under high-speed conditions.
More importantly, the absence of reliable and domainspecific evaluation benchmarks makes it difficult to rigorously
assess the capability and safety of these models. Due to
physical constraints like fixed tracks and extended braking
distances, safe train operation demands recognizing static
information (e.g., signals) and anticipating dynamic risks
(e.g., animals crossings or moving obstacles). Yet, current research predominantly focuses on static, single-frame inference,
overlooking the dynamic, multi-frame reasoning required for
reliable automatic operation ability that is more critical and
better aligned with real-world ATO environments.
To address these limitations, we introduce RailVQA-bench,

2

Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed RailVQA-CoM framework, which consists of three hierarchical modules: (1) a Perception module that efficiently extracts
visual primitives; (2) a Motion Analysis and Memory Log module that captures motion patterns and maintains temporal context for dynamic scenes; and (3)
a Cognitive Inference module that performs high-level reasoning and supports decision-oriented inference.

the first comprehensive Visual Question Answering (VQA)
benchmark specifically designed for cab-view visual cognition in ATO. RailVQA-bench establishes a unified evaluation
paradigm that integrates static scene understanding with dynamic safety-critical reasoning. It comprises 20,000 singleframe QA pairs for visual information understanding and
1,168 video-based QA pairs for risk anticipation. The benchmark further requires the model to output structured perceiving–reasoning–planning Chain-of-Thought (CoT) grounded in
visual evidence and operational constraints, enabling rigorous
evaluation of interpretable perception and reasoning, while
improving decision transparency.
We further propose RailVQA-CoM, a Collaborative
large–small Model framework for cab-view visual cognition
in ATO. As illustrated in Fig. 1, it integrates the efficiency of
lightweight perception models with the cognitive capabilities
of large multi-modal models (LMMs). Instead of end-to-end
black-box inference, RailVQA-CoM adopts a three-module
hierarchical architecture: (1) a Small-Model Perception Module
for efficient extraction of visual primitives, (2) a Motion
Analysis and Memory Log Module for analyzing motion trend
and constructing semantic representations when coping with
dynamic scenes, and (3) a Large Model Cognitive Inference
Module, which guides LMMs to generate structured CoT
reasoning. This complete design partly reduces computational
overhead while mitigating hallucination. Experiments demonstrate that our framework not only nearly increases endto-end throughput speed, but also effectively mitigates fatal
visual hallucinations (with up to a 10-point improvement
on the evaluation metrics), while supporting model-agnostic
deployment methods for LMMs. In summary, this work makes
the following three primary contributions:
•

Dataset: We present the first VQA benchmark for ATO

that evaluates cab-view visual cognitive generalization
and interpretability. It comprises 20,000 single-image QA
pairs and 1,168 video-based QA pairs.
• Metrics: Building on prevailing evaluation practices in
autonomous driving, we propose a 12-dimensional, logicdriven evaluation protocol with an LMM-assisted scoring
pipeline for cab-view visual cognition in ATO, shifting
the focus from perception-only accuracy to cognitive
reasoning.
• Framework: We develop a collaborative large–small
model framework for cab-view visual cognition in
ATO, enabling more efficient and interpretable decisionoriented understanding.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Railway Scene Perception
Computer vision has been increasingly adopted in railway
systems for basic perception tasks. To drive this field forward,
the community has established several benchmarks. Early
efforts, such as RailSem19 [3], partly catalyzed scene understanding in rail environments, while OSDaR23 [4] pushed
the boundaries of multi-sensor fusion for obstacle detection. To further enhance perception robustness, datasets like
MRSI [12] introduced multi-modal infrared and RGB imagery for adverse lighting conditions, while other works have
incorporated LiDAR [13] to provide precise 3D geometric
measurements. More recently, RailGoerl24 [5] provided highquality sequences for dynamic multi-object tracking, and SynRailObs [14] introduced synthetic data generation pipelines to
enrich the distribution of rare track anomalies. However, these
works predominantly target low-level perception tasks, failing
to capture the causal relationship between visual elements and
railway operational response.

3

In parallel with dataset development, algorithmic innovations are still developing. Early research frequently employed
image differencing [15] or optical flow analysis [16] for
track obstacle detection, though these methods often suffered
from high false alarm rates under environmental noise. To
mitigate these false alarms, modern approaches have evolved
to incorporate dynamic background modeling [17] and advanced neural networks (CNNs). For instance, the recently
proposed YOLO-Rail framework [18] optimized real-time
track obstacle detection specifically for resource-constrained
edge deployment, and similar YOLO-based mechanisms have
also attempted to integrate preliminary risk assessment modules [19]. Recent advances have introduced real-time multitask
learning [20] and Lidar-Camera fusion [21] to railway perception. However, the inherent rigidity of these task-customized
architectures still suffer from limited generalization across
open-world scenarios. Meanwhile, they often fail to couple
visual features with train-specific kinematic limits, thereby
falling short in complex spatiotemporal safety reasoning.
B. VQA in Autonomous Driving
Visual Question Answering (VQA) [22] has progressively
evolved from a perception-centric task into a representative
paradigm for evaluating high-level visual Cognition. This
transition is largely driven by the rapid development of Large
Multi-modal Models (LMMs), such as LLaVA [23] and QwenVL [24], which substantially enhance both visual understanding and reasoning capabilities. In contrast to traditional perception pipelines [25], VQA frames scene understanding and
decision-oriented inference as structured question–answering,
providing a more unified interface for probing and assessing
complex visual reasoning processes.
Motivated by this formulation, the autonomous-driving
community has adopted VQA as a benchmark and a training
paradigm for vision–language reasoning in traffic scenes.
Early efforts, including TrafficQA [26], NuScenes-QA [27],
and LingoQA [28], provide structured supervision for traffic
understanding. Building on this foundation, recent work integrates LMMs into end-to-end frameworks [29]. For example,
DriveLM [30] and DriveVLM [31] combine graph-based representations with vision–language reasoning to connect perception and planning, while DriveGPT4 [32] and RoboTronDrive [33] further emphasize interpretable control and spatiotemporal alignment. To enhance reasoning consistency, recent
approaches incorporate retrieval-augmented Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) [7] and spatially-aware prompting [34], alongside more
rigorous benchmarks such as DriveLMM-o1 [35], which evaluate step-by-step reasoning in complex driving scenarios.
Nevertheless, road-centric VQA formulations do not transfer
directly to automatic train operation. Trains operate on fixed
tracks, exhibit less flexibility, and must comply with stringent
signaling and operating rules; these characteristics mandate
customized modeling paradigms and dedicated evaluation
benchmarks.
C. Collaboration of Large and Small Models
Although Large Multi-modal Models (LMMs) provide
strong open-world analysis [36] and reasoning capabilities, the

huge computational cost brought about by LMMs inference
cannot be ignored. To address this issue, recent research
has increasingly explored collaborative paradigms that couple
large models with lightweight specialized models [37], [38],
enabling a more efficient allocation of computation.
A representative direction is dynamic resource allocation, as
exemplified by the Big.Little Vision Transformer [39], which
improves efficiency by assigning tasks of varying complexity
to models of different scales. Building on this idea, subsequent
works have proposed diverse collaboration strategies. For
instance, VisionGPT [40] offloads perception to specialized
modules while reserving high-level reasoning for large models,
and speculative execution methods [41] accelerate inference by
generating intermediate reasoning drafts with smaller models.
Meanwhile, adaptive routing mechanisms, such as KCM [42]
and AdaCoMed [43], dynamically assign inputs based on task
difficulty, further improving efficiency and robustness. In the
context of VQA, recent approaches also incorporate multimodal heuristics to ground and stabilize LMM reasoning [44].
Although existing large-small model collaborative architectures effectively balance efficiency and capability, they
predominantly target static tasks. Currently, there is still a
distinct lack of collaborative paradigms explicitly designed to
improve the computational efficiency of complex reasoning on
dense video streams. Achieving this is particularly difficult, as
it demands a delicate trade-off between processing high-framerate visual inputs efficiently and maintaining the cognitive
depth.
III. R AILVQA- BENCH
This section details RailVQA-bench, the first VQA benchmark for cab-view visual cognition in ATO. The benchmark
is constructed via a pipeline combining automated generation (Sections III-C), and is compared with existing railway
datasets in Table I.
A. Task Formulation
RailVQA-bench consists of two complementary subtasks—Static Single-frame VQA and Dynamic Multi-frame
VQA (Fig. 2)—designed to evaluate cognitive reasoning in
railway scenarios from a unified perspective. The static subtask
mainly focus on rule compliance and right-of-way reasoning,
while the dynamic subtask mainly assess kinematic risk awareness and safety-critical reasoning under temporal context. The
statistical distributions of subtask-specific entities and question
intents are reported in Figures 3b and 3c, respectively.
Single-frame VQA: Given a single cab-view (first-person)
image I ∈ RH×W ×3 , the model must identify key visual
elements and infer the appropriate operational command according to railway features. The main task is to accurately
ground visual evidence in rules and regulatory constraints to
produce a compliant operation suggestion.
Multi-frame VQA: The input video is a sequence of T
frames S = {I1 , I2 , ..., IT } with a question, and the model
must track dynamic objects over time and discriminate benign
background motion (e.g., passengers on a platform) from
hazardous intrusions (e.g., pedestrians entering the tracks).

4

Task Ⅰ: Static Single-Frame VQA
Input: Diverse Single-frame Scene (𝐼) + Compliance Query (𝑄)
Structured Output ℱ 𝐼, 𝑄 → {𝒞𝓅ℯ𝓇𝒸 , 𝒞𝓇ℯ𝒶𝓈 , 𝒞𝓅𝓁𝒶𝓃 , 𝒜𝒻𝒾𝓃𝒶𝓁 }

Rule-based Compliance
1. Perception (𝓒𝓹𝓮𝓻𝓬 )
Detected objects and red signal light.
Snow weather

Tunnel

City Railway

2. Reasoning (𝓒𝓻𝓮𝓪𝓼 )
Red signal indicates “STOP” based on SOP rules.
3. Planning (𝓒𝓹𝓵𝓪𝓷 )
Apply standard braking and wait.

What is the signal status?
Is the way accessible?

Night

Railway station

Fog weather

4. Final Answer (𝓐𝓯𝓲𝓷𝓪𝓵 )
Red signal, stop and wait.

Task Ⅱ: Dynamic Multi-Frame VQA
Input: Kinematic Multi-frame Sequence (𝑆) + Action Comprehension Query (𝑄)
Time

Kinematic Risk Assessment

Structured Output ℱ 𝑆, 𝑄 → {𝒞𝓅ℯ𝓇𝒸 , 𝒞𝓇ℯ𝒶𝓈 , 𝒞𝓅𝓁𝒶𝓃 , 𝒜𝒻𝒾𝓃𝒶𝓁 }
1. Perception (𝓒𝓹𝓮𝓻𝓬 )
Pedestrians detected and tracking movement on track.

2. Reasoning (𝓒𝓻𝓮𝓪𝓼 )

Train high momentum and short braking distance creates
imminent collision risk.

3. Planning (𝓒𝓹𝓵𝓪𝓷 )
Apply emergency braking and sound warning.

4. Final Answer (𝓐𝓯𝓲𝓷𝓪𝓵 )

Is there an immediate kinematic hazard?
If so, what is the required response?

There is an imminent hazard, apply emergency brake.

Fig. 2. This figure presents the standardized input–output schemas for the benchmark’s two core subtasks: Static Single-frame VQA and Dynamic Multi-frame
VQA. Given a visual input—either a single frame I or a video sequence S—and its associated question Q, the model output is required to follow a predefined,
structured chain-of-thought (CoT) format.

It also requires physical commonsense reasoning that reflects
the train’s high momentum and one-degree-of-freedom motion
constraint, so as to be able to assess the risk based on the
relative distance and speed, and support emergency decisions
beyond single-frame recognition.
Structured Chain-of-Thought (CoT) Output: To improve
interpretability and enable standardized evaluation, both tasks
require responses in a structured chain-of-thought (CoT) format. Formally, given a visual input V (either a single-frame
image I or a frame sequence S) and a question Q, the model
learns a function F that produces:

high-quality frames selected from RailGoerl24. Together, they
cover diverse environmental conditions (e.g., illumination and
weather) and operational contexts (e.g., urban tramways and
high-speed rail).
Dynamic Scenario Collection: To evaluate temporal reasoning in train operations, we further process the video data
in RailGoerl24. Using temporal segmentation and semantic
re-labeling, we restructure the raw streams into 584 dynamic
scenarios capturing safety-critical events such as intrusions
and signal-state transitions, which form the basis of our crossframe reasoning tasks.

F(V, Q) → {Cperc , Creas , Cplan , Af inal }

C. Automatic QA Generation Pipeline
Following the automated benchmark construction paradigm
of Space-LLaVA [45], we develop an automated QA generation pipeline using Qwen-VL-Max [46] as the teacher model.
It is selected for its fine-grained visual grounding and its robust long-context modeling for multi-frame temporal analysis.
Through rigorous prompting, we generate explicit Chain-ofThought (CoT) annotations and extract multiple queries per
visual input. By creating one open-ended question and one
multiple-choice question for each static image and each video
clip, we systematically expand the raw 10,000 images and 584
video clips into 20,000 static QA pairs and 1,168 dynamic QA
pairs. See Appendix A for prompting details.

(1)

where Cperc summarizes salient visual evidence (e.g., signal
aspect), Creas denotes logical/physical inference, Cplan represents decision-oriented inference, and Af inal is the final
concise answer. This structure enforces explicit reasoning
stages and enables fine-grained evaluation of model.
B. Dataset Collection
To construct a comprehensive and diverse benchmark for
railway visual reasoning, we build RailVQA-bench by integrating and strictly filtering two public datasets: RailSem19 [3]
and RailGoerl24 [5]. The collection protocol targets two
core capabilities: (i) single-frame scene understanding and (ii)
cross-frame temporal reasoning.
Static Scenario Collection: For single-frame asset recognition and hazard identification, we compile a large-scale static
subset consisting of 8,500 images from RailSem19 and 1,500

D. Dataset Validation
To ensure annotation quality, we adopted a validation protocol tailored to the two subtasks. Because multi-frame reasoning is difficult to generate and verify reliably, we manually

5

 1 X P E H U  R I  6 D P S O H V

    

 0 H D Q      
 0 H G L D Q      

 ( Q W L W L H V    . H \ Z R U G V

    

    
    
   
   
   
 

                                 

 7 R W D O  & K D U D F W H U  / H Q J W K
  3 H U F H S W L R Q    5 H D V R Q L Q J    3 O D Q Q L Q J 

(a) Distribution of CoT Lengths

Question Intents

 . H \  5 D L O Z D \  ( Q W L W L H V

 & R 7  / H Q J W K  ' L V W U L E X W L R Q
 W U D F N
 V L J Q D O
 W U D L Q
 V S H H G
 V W R S
 Z H D W K H U
 R Y H U K H D G
 F U R V V L Q J
 V W D W L R Q
 F D W H Q D U \

      
      
      
      

7.1%

      
      
      
      
      
      
 

      

42.3%

48.1%
Action & Planning
Option Selection

      

 ) U H T X H Q F \  R I  2 F F X U U H Q F H

(b) Distribution of Key Railway Entities

Perception & State
Others

(c) Question Intents Distribution

Fig. 3. Comprehensive statistical overview of the RailVQA-bench dataset. (a) shows the distribution of generated CoT character lengths, reflecting
the benchmark’s emphasis on logic-intensive reasoning. (b) reports the occurrence frequencies of key railway entities, demonstrating broad domainspecific coverage. (c) summarizes the distribution of question intents, indicating a primary focus on action planning and safety-related decisions
rather than simple perception.

reviewed the entire dynamic subset, correcting minor issues
and removing samples with substantial errors. Given the larger
scale and relative simplicity of the static subset, we conducted
statistical quality control by auditing 1,000 instances. This
audit yielded a pass rate exceeding 95%, indicating high
annotation fidelity and providing further evidence for the
trustworthiness of our automated generation process for the
static subset.
E. Evaluation Methodology
To assess high-level reasoning and decision-making on
RailVQA-bench, we adapt the rubric-based protocol of
DriveLMM-o1 [35] - originally developed for autonomous
driving - to the railway domain. The resulting framework
defines 12 semantic dimensions (Table VI) and aims to evaluate the qualities of perception and reasoning in train-driving
scenarios.
We further adopt an LLM-as-a-Judge [47] setting to evaluate
the semantic quality of predicted CoTs. Specifically, we use
Qwen3-Max [24] as the judge model to compare model outputs against manually revised references, leveraging its strong
instruction following and logical reasoning. Prior work reports
strong agreement between large-model judges and human
experts on NLP benchmarks [48]. Moreover, this paradigm
has been increasingly adopted in recent top-tier studies on
autonomous driving [30], [32] and visual reasoning (VQA).
IV. R AILVQA-C O M: C OLLABORATIVE L ARGE -S MALL
M ODELS F RAMEWORK
This section introduces RailVQA-CoM, a collaborative
framework designed to better accommodate dynamic multiframe scenarios. In addition, to evaluate spatial understanding
ability, we adopt a lightweight RailVQA-CoM variant that
retains the small-model perception module and the LMMbased cognitive inference module for static scenarios. In both
settings, the input is a query paired with either a video clip or
a single image.

A. Small Model Perception Module
This module focuses on the rapid and precise acquisition
of structured visual primitives from the raw video stream or a
static image.
Customized Railway Detector. To balance efficiency and
domain accuracy, we adopt YOLO26m [49] as the backbone
detector. We fine-tune it on RailSem19 and extend the label
space with additional manual annotations for common nonrailway obstacles (e.g., pedestrians and vehicles), enhancing
its generalization ability.
State Estimation and Tracking. We employ ByteTrack [50] for multi-object tracking. By associating detections
across frames using IoU (Intersection over Union) and motion
consistency, ByteTrack assigns each target a persistent identity
id, ensuring cross-frame identity continuity.
Output and Visual Enhancement. For each frame t, the
module outputs a structured detection set:
Bt = {(x1 , y1 , x2 , y2 , c, id)i | i ∈ Ot }

(2)

where (x1 , y1 , x2 , y2 ) are bounding-box coordinates, c is the
semantic class, id is the tracking identity, and Ot represents
the set of all active tracked objects. We also add the sequence
index (e.g., “Seq: t/T ”) on each frame to provide an explicit
temporal anchor for the downstream LMM.

B. Motion Analysis and Memory Log Module
This module is designed specifically to handle dynamic
multi-frame scenarios. It converts visual information into
temporally coherent, physically meaningful semantics within
a memory log.
Multi-dimensional Motion Estimation. For each tracked
target i, we compute an instantaneous 2D motion vector from
its center Cti = (xc , yc )t over an interval ∆t:
vti =

i
Cti − Ct−∆t
= (vx , vy )
∆t

(3)

6

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF R AILVQA- BENCH WITH RELATED DATASETS . E XISTING DATASETS SUCH AS OSDA R23 [4] AND S YN R AIL O BS [14] PRIMARILY
ADVANCE PERCEPTION ( E . G ., VIA MULTI - SENSOR FUSION OR SYNTHETIC DATA GENERATION ) BUT PROVIDE LIMITED HIGH - LEVEL COGNITIVE
ANNOTATIONS . R AILVQA- BENCH ADDRESSES THIS LIMITATION BY EXPLICITLY COUPLING PERCEPTION WITH REASONING AND PLANNING .

Modality
Static
Dynamic

Annotations
Q&A
Logic (CoT)

Dataset

Year

RailSem19 [3]
OSDaR23 [4]
RailGoerl24 [5]
SynRailObs [14]

2019
2023
2024
2025

✓
✓
✓

✓
✓
-

✓
✓
✓
✓

-

-

Sem. Seg. & Detection
Multi-sensor Perception
Visual Tracking
Synthetic Obstacle Detection

DriveLM [30](Auto Driving)

2023

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

Vehicle Driving Reasoning

RailVQA-bench (Ours)

2026

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

Perception & Reasoning

Bbox/Mask

Furthermore, to capture depth-wise movement (e.g., objects
approaching the train along the tracks), we introduce the Area
Change Rate ρit . This rate is defined as
ρit =

Ait − Ait−∆t
Ait−∆t

(4)

where Ait is the area calculated by bounding box in frame t.
Kinematic State Inference. To filter out perceptual noise
while retaining sensitivity to critical hazards, we employ a
dual-threshold gating mechanism. Besides area change rate,
we use an adaptive threshold conditioned on the boundingbox width wi :
τdyn = max(τmin , λ · wi )

(5)

where τmin is a baseline noise floor and λ controls scale
adaptation. The kinematic state is defined as
(
M oving, if ||vti || ≥ τdyn or |ρit | > γ
Stateit =
(6)
Static,
otherwise
A target is classified as Moving if either its spatial displacement exceeds the dynamic threshold τdyn or its absolute area
change rate |ρit | surpasses a sensitivity constant γ.
Identity Track Maintenance. To address track fragmentation caused by transient occlusions or detector false negatives,
we introduce a robust Spatio-temporal ID mechanism. This
approach actively re-associates newly detected, unmatched
objects (denoted as dj ) with recently lost identities (denoted
as i∗ ) by evaluating a joint spatio-temporal constraint C. Here
is the explanation of constraint C:

∗

Class(dj ) = Class(i ), and
∗
∗
i
C(dj , i ) ⇐⇒ t − tlast ≤ δtol , and
(7)

 j
i∗
||Ct − Clast ||2 < θ
When a target disappears, it is maintained in a short-term
buffer for a tolerance period δtol . If a new detection of the
same class appears within this window, identity recovery is
triggered based on a scale-aware spatial search radius θ =
max(2·wj , λmin ). This dynamic association ensures temporal
continuity across complex scenes.

Task Focus

C. Large Model Cognitive Inference Module.
We introduce three mechanisms for efficient and interpretable LMM training-free inference:
Dynamic Budget Allocation and Adaptive Sampling.
To mitigate computational overhead and context dilution, we
applied an event-driven dynamic budget allocation mechanism.
For a sequence of length T , we first compute a heuristic
event score st for each frame based on the intensity of
dynamic events (e.g., object appearances, significant spatial
displacements).
The overall scene complexity is aggregated as
PT
S = t=1 st .
The system dynamically assigns an effective frame budget
K ≤ Kmax based on the scene complexity:


if S ≥ τhigh
Kmax ,
(8)
K = max(3, ⌊α · Kmax ⌋), if τlow ≤ S < τhigh


2,
if S < τlow
where τlow and τhigh are complexity thresholds, dynamically
set based on the complexity score distribution calculated on a
calibration set using our perception and motion analysis mechanisms. This mechanism facilitates easy threshold adjustment
across different datasets or scenarios. And α is a scaling factor.
Finally, to extract the most informative moments, the sequence is divided into K −1 temporal segments. The frame t∗k
with the highest local score st within each segment is selected
as a keyframe. The final set T ∗ = {t∗1 , . . . , t∗K−1 , T } includes
the last frame to anchor the current visual state.
Multi-modal Fusion and Defensive Prompting. We construct the multi-modal prompt by concatenating the keyframes
T ∗ with the structured textual logs and query. Yet, because
introduced lightweight perception detectors inherently struggle
with out-of-distribution (OOD) anomalies, we implement a
Defensive Prompting mechanism. When the log consecutively
outputs a “No objects” state, the system dynamically injects a
fallback instruction, forcing the LMM to disregard the empty
log and rely exclusively on its own visual comprehension to
detect atypical hazards.
Structured Chain-of-Thought (CoT) Generation. Finally,
we embed a structured Chain-of-Thought (CoT) template into
the system prompt. This instruction guides the LMM to
articulate its perceiving-reasoning-planning steps, enhancing
the interpretability and transparency of system response.

7

TABLE II
Q UANTITATIVE COMPARISON ON THE DYNAMIC S CENE VQA TASK . (↑) INDICATES HIGHER IS BETTER , WHERE THE CRITERIA OF SCORING ARE LISTED
IN APPENDIX . N OTE THAT S YSTEM TPS MEASURES THE EFFECTIVE TOKEN GENERATION RATE OVER THE ENTIRE SYSTEM .

InternVL3.5

Qwen3-VL

Method

CQ Acc. (%)

Overall Score

Physics & Mom. (↑)

Risk Assess. (↑)

Rule Adhere. (↑)

Details (↑)

Hallucination (↑)

S-TPS (↑)

LMM Only
Unadapted Detector
Uniform Samples
RailVQA-CoM

67.16
60.45
74.80
75.43

60.60
52.50
66.73
67.92

69.4
67.6
75.2
75.3

54.4
41.1
58.8
55.7

71.6
71.5
80.1
79.9

53.0
43.9
59.6
59.2

53.8
51.6
61.0
71.4

5.80
13.32
11.54
17.06

LMM Only
Unadapted Detector
Uniform Samples
RailVQA-CoM

84.36
82.17
82.53
84.93

71.01
71.80
74.00
76.64

78.9
81.3
80.6
81.8

63.8
64.7
68.4
68.1

79.6
85.4
84.8
86.4

54.8
58.9
66.5
67.4

71.5
71.0
74.4
81.2

6.04
9.25
8.16
10.34

V. E XPERIMENTS
A. Experiment Setup
Baselines and Evaluation Setting. To demonstrate the
model-agnostic properties of our proposed framework, we
selected four mainstream open-source LMMs with varying
parameter scales: Qwen3-VL-Instruct-8B [46], InternVL3.58B [51], LLaVA-1.5-7B [23], LLaMA3-vision-11B [52].
All experiments are conducted on RailVQA-bench instead
of conventional railway datasets (e.g., RailSem19 [3] and
OSDaR23 [4]), as the latter are designed mainly for low-level
perception tasks, thus do not provide the QA supervision or
reasoning annotations.
To unify the evaluation of the overall score, the ratings for
Hallucination, Missing Step, Missing details are scaled such
that higher scores represent better performance. Please refer
to Table VI in Appendix for specific scoring details.
We consider two baseline configurations for comparison:
1) LMM Only: The LMM model answers user queries
directly from raw static images or video frames, relying
solely on its pre-trained zero-shot capability without external
perceptual priors.
2) Unadapted Detector: This setting preserves the full
temporal pipeline but replaces the perception module with
a standard, unfine-tuned YOLO26m detector, isolating the
contribution of domain adaptation in the perception module
from that of the reasoning middleware.
3) Uniform Samples: This configuration utilizes the complete RailVQA-CoM framework but disables the dynamic
budget allocation. It equidistantly extracts a fixed number
(equal to the maximum frame of the dynamic sampling) of
frames across the temporal sequence.
4) RailVQA-CoM (Ours): Our proposed framework, which
integrates domain-adapted YOLO26m-Rail perception to support the LMM’s cognitive reasoning.
Implementation Details. Experiments were conducted with
four NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPUs. We fine-tuned only the
YOLO26m [49] detector on our generalization-enhanced railway dataset, while keeping the LMM frozen to preserve
generality. For evaluation, we used Qwen3-Max to score
the generated chain-of-thought (CoT) outputs across the 12
semantic dimensions defined in RailVQA-bench.
B. Dynamic Scene Inference Experiments.
Experimental Setting To systematically evaluate our proposed framework in multi-frame (video clip) reasoning and

efficiency, we introduce system-level metric: System TPS (STPS) [53], which is defined as the total number of generated tokens divided by the end-to-end latency of the entire
large–small model framework.

  

 5 D L O 9 4 $  & R 0

  

 2 Y H U D O O  6 F R U H

LMM

  
 / 0 0  2 Q O \

  

 5 D L O 9 4 $  & R 0

  
  
  
  
  

 / 0 0 V

 , Q W H U Q 9 /   
 4 Z H Q   9 /

 / 0 0  2 Q O \

 

 

  

  

  

  

 ( Q G  W R  ( Q G  7 R N H Q  * H Q H U D W L R Q  6 S H H G   6  7 3 6 
Fig. 4. Performance-efficiency comparison in dynamic scenarios. RailVQACoM achieves simultaneous substantial gains, pushing the performance towards the top-right by increasing end-to-end throughput and enhancing
cognitive scores.

Results and Analysis. As visually demonstrated in
Fig. 4, RailVQA-CoM successfully improves the performanceefficiency ability of the LMM Only baseline, propelling both
models from the suboptimal lower-left toward the optimal
top-right quadrant. Table II quantitatively confirms this dual
breakthrough. On the efficiency front, adaptive keyframe sampling effectively increases the LMM reasoning throughput, for
example InternVL3.5’s QA speed surges from 5.80 to 17.06
S-TPS, which has even increased by three times. On the cognitive front, the results demonstrate profound improvements in
dynamic hazard anticipation, driving Physics & Momentum
score from 69.4 to 75.3 in InternVL3.5, and Hallucination
Score from 53.8 to 71.4. Overall, compared to traditional
approaches, our framework demonstrates a capability improvement in processing continuous dynamic visual streams.
C. Static Scene Inference Experiments
Experimental Setting. To evaluate spatial understanding
and rule compliance in static frame, we apply a lightweight
Visual Prompting mechanism for the RailVQA-CoM and
Unadapted Detector configurations, bypassing the temporal

8

TABLE III
Q UANTITATIVE COMPARISON ON THE S TATIC S CENE VQA TASK . W E REPORT A COMPREHENSIVE SUITE OF FINE - GRAINED METRICS TO QUANTIFY
COGNITIVE IMPROVEMENTS . (↑) INDICATES HIGHER IS BETTER .
LMM

Method

Overall Score

CQ Acc. (%)

Faithfulness (↑)

Risk Assess. (↑)

Rule Adherence (↑)

Object Underst. (↑)

Hallucination (↑)

Details (↑)

LLaVA-1.5

LMM Only
Unadapted Detector
RailVQA-CoM

69.82
71.10
71.48

72.20
75.81
74.90

68.1
69.0
70.0

69.1
70.0
70.5

70.9
71.7
72.5

67.7
69.1
69.7

76.1
79.0
78.8

60.8
61.8
63.0

LLaMA3-Vision

LMM Only
Unadapted Detector
RailVQA-CoM

65.72
66.57
67.00

81.68
80.56
80.74

67.2
65.5
63.8

65.4
66.3
66.7

67.2
68.5
70.5

62.1
63.5
63.0

70.5
73.4
74.2

57.7
58.2
58.6

InternVL3.5

LMM Only
Unadapted Detector
RailVQA-CoM

71.04
73.20
74.08

78.10
81.55
82.40

74.5
74.4
76.5

73.6
71.7
75.8

75.1
76.6
77.0

73.3
68.9
74.4

71.7
79.5
82.1

61.0
62.4
65.2

Qwen3-VL

LMM Only
Unadapted Detector
RailVQA-CoM

74.81
72.20
75.74

85.20
86.10
86.40

76.3
70.7
74.3

74.9
73.0
75.3

78.2
75.5
79.3

71.2
68.1
72.8

81.1
81.7
87.9

64.9
60.1
67.8

TABLE IV
C ROSS - DOMAIN GENERALIZATION ON THE D RIVE LMM- O 1 BENCHMARK FOR AUTONOMOUS DRIVING .
Method

LMM

Overall Score

CQ Acc. (%)

Faithfulness (↑)

Risk Assess. (↑)

Rule Adhere. (↑)

Scene Aware. (↑)

Hallucination (↑)

Details (↑)

DriveLMM-o1

InternVL-2.5
Qwen2.5-VL

57.48
56.63

54.11
51.14

49.84
47.43

52.55
53.08

67.22
68.52

54.67
49.91

51.20
50.96

51.69
51.70

RailVQA-CoM

DriveLMM-o1(Qwen2.5-VL)

58.89

54.57

48.66

52.88

68.07

56.48

52.81

53.77

TABLE V
A BLATION STUDY OF CORE COMPONENTS .
Variant
w/o adaptive sampling
w/o event stream log
Full RailVQA-CoM

Overall Score

CQ Acc. (%)

Risk Assess. (↑)

Physics & Mom. (↑)

Object Underst. (↑)

Semantic Cov. (↑)

Hallucination (↑)

Details (↑)

74.00
64.67
76.64

82.53
78.80
84.93

68.4
56.5
68.1

80.6
76.9
81.8

72.1
58.3
74.3

63.8
56.6
71.0

74.3
60.3
81.2

66.5
57.2
67.4

modules. Specifically, bounding boxes and semantic labels
from the perception module are rendered onto the RGB image.
This augmented image, alongside a customized Chain-ofThought prompt, is then fed into the LMM.
Results and Analysis. As shown in Table III, RailVQACoM consistently achieves the highest Overall Score and CQ
Accuracy across all baselines.
Comparing the LMM Only with the Unadapted Detector demonstrates the fundamental benefit of RailVQA-CoM
framework. Explicitly overlaying bounding boxes successfully
anchors the LMM’s attention, significantly reducing hallucinations (e.g., the Hallucination score of InternVL3.5 jumps from
71.7 to 79.5). However, the un-finetuned Unadapted Detector
struggles with railway-specific assets. Its generic bounding
boxes can mislead the LMM, causing a noticeable drop in
specialized metrics like Object Understanding (e.g., from 71.2
down to 68.1 for Qwen3-VL).
RailVQA-CoM resolves this bottleneck by deploying the
domain-adapted YOLO26m-Rail. This confirms that domainspecific visual cues are essential for reliable LMM reasoning
in railway scenarios.
D. Cross-domain Generalization
To verify that our collaborative paradigm extends beyond
the railway domain, we evaluated its generalization on the
autonomous vehicle driving benchmark, DriveLMM-o1 [35].
The original DriveLMM-o1 method utilizes domain-specific

models, where the InternVL-2.5 variant reported higher scores
than the Qwen2.5-VL variant on their specific benchmark. To
demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework, we deliberately wrapped the lower-scoring Qwen2.5-VL model within
RailVQA-CoM to provide it with explicit perceptual priors.
As shown in Table IV, the integration yields compelling
improvements. Empowered by RailVQA-CoM, the Qwen2.5VL model not only achieves a significant performance leap
over its original baseline, but also completely surpasses the
stronger InternVL-2.5 expert model. Notably, its Scene Awareness score surges from 49.91 to 56.48, lifting the Overall Score
to 58.89. This confirms that our proposed paradigm serves as a
versatile and LMM training-free framework that can integrate
with and enhance the performance of LMMs across diverse
autonomous driving scenarios.
E. Ablation Study
To validate the necessity of Event Stream Log and Adaptive
Temporal Sampling in our dynamic design, we conduct an
ablation study on Qwen3-VL-8B. This classical model was
chosen to represent our framework’s capabilities; identical
performance degradation trends were observed across the other
baselines when these modules were removed.
Fig. 5 and Table V show that both components are critical.
Removing the Event Stream Log reduces the Overall Score
to 64.67, largely due to sharp drops in Operational Risk
Assessment (56.5). Without explicit velocity cues, the model

9

  

 2 Y H U D O O  6 F R U H

 6 F R U H V

  

 3 K \ V L F V  	  0 R P H Q W X P

    

    

  
  

 5 L V N  $ V V H V V P H Q W

    

    
    

    
    

    

  
  

    

 Z  R  $ G D S W L Y H
 6 D P S O L Q J

 Z  R  ( Y H Q W
 6 W U H D P  / R J

This is an extreme edge case, shown in Fig. 6(b), rare
in actual ATO operations, which serves as a rigorous stress
test for handling out-of-distribution (OOD) anomalies by the
RailVQA-CoM framework.
Triggered Middleware Status (Perception Log + Warning):
Frame 1: No objects.
Frame 2: No objects.
...
Frame 20: No objects.

  
  

2) Case 2: Zero-Shot Anomaly Detection

 ) X O O  5 D L O 9 4 $  & R 0

Fig. 5. Ablation study of the core middleware components of RailVQA-CoM.
To intuitively demonstrate the impact of each module on model performance,
we extract three representative metrics (Overall Score, Risk Assessment, and
Physics & Momentum) from the ablation table to construct this bar chart.

fails to maintain temporal continuity and cannot reliably
anticipate collision risk. Replacing Adaptive Sampling with
uniform sampling also degrades the Missing Details score,
indicating that motion-saliency-driven selection is important
for capturing key hazard moments.
F. Qualitative Results
We provide two case studies (Fig. 6) to illustrate how
RailVQA-CoM produces transparent, step-by-step reasoning
and mitigates the impact of worthless inputs.
1) Case 1: Dynamic Intrusion and Track Maintenance
As illustrated in Fig. 6(a), the small detector captures
the targets, and our motion analysis module robustly handles transient tracking losses via track maintenance. As
shown in the generated logs below, temporarily occluded
targets are successfully preserved in the event stream with
[Occluded/Lost] descriptors, maintaining a complete
spatial-temporal stream.
Generated Perception Log (Middleware Output Snippet):
...
Frame 15: person (ID:4) at [40,230,112,433]
... Motion: moving left | ... | person (ID:1)
[Occluded/Lost] predicted at approx [1916, 1024]
Frame 16 to Frame 20: person (ID:4) at
[31,229,109,433] ... Motion: moving left | ...
| person (ID:1) [Occluded/Lost] predicted at
approx [1428, 565]

RailVQA-CoM Output (LMM Structured CoT):
Question: What dynamic trend is observed in the pedestrian movement across the railway tracks?
Perceiving: Multiple individuals are moving along the
railway tracks. The perception log confirms their motion
is consistently rightward and slightly downward.
Reasoning: The motion vectors in the log indicate a clear,
continuous movement away from the camera’s viewpoint.
Track intrusion poses an extreme collision risk.
Planning: Immediate action required for train: activate
emergency brakes/signals and alert railway personnel.
Final Answer: The pedestrians are moving in a continuous, coordinated flow from left to right across the railway
tracks.

--- AUTOMATED DETECTOR STATUS: UNRELIABLE --System Report: The automated object detector found
NO standard targets (People/Cars).
CRITICAL WARNING: The detector often FAILS to see
non-standard obstacles (e.g., Bicycles, Rocks,
Debris).
INSTRUCTION: IGNORE the detector’s claim of ’No
objects’. You MUST rely SOLELY on the Visual
Images to find anomalies.

Under this fallback mechanism, the LMM disregards the
unreliable log and instead relies on its inherent zero-shot
visual grounding to identify the obstacles, thereby inferring
the imminent collision hazard and the consequent derailment
risk.
RailVQA-CoM Output (LMM Structured CoT):
Question: What dynamic event is occurring on the railway
tracks in the sequence?
Perceiving: The visual sequence shows a bicycle lying
across the left rail of the tracks, positioned in the path
of travel.
Reasoning: As the train progresses along the tracks, it will
inevitably encounter the stationary bicycle lying across the
rails. This presents a severe and immediate hazard, as the
bicycle will be struck, posing a significant risk of the train.
Planning: The system must flag this as a critical safety
violation requiring immediate intervention to remove the
obstacles from the tracks.
Final Answer: A stationary bicycle is illegally placed on
the active railway tracks, creating a severe safety hazard.

VI. C ONCLUSION
We present RailVQA-bench, the first VQA benchmark to
comprehensively evaluate both static and dynamic, safetycritical kinematic reasoning for cab-view visual cognition in
ATO, and RailVQA-CoM, an efficient large–small collaborative framework that supports a model-agnostic architecture
for LMM deployment. By decoupling high-frequency perception from complex reasoning, our approach simultaneously
improves computational efficiency and cognitive accuracy for
LMMs. In critical dynamic scenarios, it increases end-toend throughput per second about 3 times, while effectively
overcoming context dilution and hallucinated reasoning. Overall, this work preliminarily advances reliable and efficient
cognitive intelligence for railway automation.
VII. L IMITATIONS
Although our framework substantially improves visual reasoning, it currently relies solely on monocular vision and
does not incorporate multi-sensor fusion (e.g., LiDAR or
millimeter-wave radar). Such fusion remains essential for accurate 3D depth estimation and robust all-weather perception.

10

(a) Case 1: Dynamic Intrusion with Multi-Object Tracking.

(b) Case 2: Zero-Shot Anomaly Detection (Defensive Fallback).

Fig. 6. Qualitative results of the RailVQA-CoM framework. (a) Case 1: The perception module tracks pedestrians and handles transient occlusions via track
maintenance, preserving spatial-temporal context for the LMM. (b) Case 2: When the detector misses an out-of-distribution obstacle (bicycle), the system
triggers a defensive fallback, prompting the LMM to identify the hazard via zero-shot visual reasoning.

Future work will focus on integrating complementary sensing
modalities to address these limitations.
Furthermore, it is worth noting that current Large Multimodal Models still exhibit certain latency limitations. Although our collaborative framework brings noticeable efficiency improvements, directly deploying such large-scale
models in Automatic Train Operation may still face practical
latency constraints. We believe that future advances in LMMs
will help alleviate this problem, and we also plan to investigate
model acceleration techniques to further mitigate it.

Interpret the visual data based...",
"cot_planning": "Action plan:
Determine the immediate driving...",
"qa_question": "A critical,
scenario-specific question...",
"qa_answer": "A detailed answer
based on the analysis.",
"mc_question": "A multiple-choice
question focusing on specific...",
"mc_options": {
"A": "Option text",
"B": "Option text", ...
},
"mc_correct": "The correct option
letter (e.g., ’A’)"

A PPENDIX
P ROMPT E NGINEERING D ETAILS
To ensure the reproducibility of our methodology and provide transparency into the behavior of the Large Multi-modal
Model (LMM), we report the core prompts used in the three
main phases of our study: dataset generation, collaborative
inference, and automated evaluation.
(I) P ROMPT FOR AUTOMATIC QA G ENERATION
To construct high-quality and domain-specific logical
Question-Answering pairs for RailVQA-bench. We employed
a strict system prompt to establish a professional persona
and a structured user prompt to enforce the output format,
constraining the output to a predefined JSON schema.
System Prompt (Persona Definition):
You are a Senior Railway Operation Expert and Instructor. Your task is to analyze images from the cab
view and generate professional question-answering
data for an automatic train operation system.
User Prompt (Task and Structural Constraint):
Analyze the provided train cab-view image. Generate
one Question-Answer (QA) pair and one Choice
Question (CQ).
Strictly output valid JSON with no Markdown formatting (do not use json). Use the following structure:
{
"cot_perception": "Visual analysis:
Identify signals (aspect/color)...",
"cot_reasoning": "Logical analysis:

}
(II) P ROMPT FOR R AILVQA-C O M C OGNITIVE
I NFERENCE
In the RailVQA-CoM framework, the LMM serves as the
cognitive brain. The prompt fuses textual spatial-temporal logs
generated by the Small Model Perception Module with visual
keyframes. We carefully designed the instructions to prioritize
visual evidence and enforce the structured reasoning pipeline.
System Prompt (multi-modal Fusion and CoT Enforcement):
You are a railway safety analysis system. Analyze
visual inputs (images) and object tracking logs to
provide a professional safety assessment.
Each image has a visual timestamp (e.g., ’Seq:
5/20’) in the top-left corner.
Input Data Instructions:
1. Images (PRIMARY SOURCE): The raw visual
truth. Trust the images at first.
2. Perception Log (SECONDARY SOURCE):
Generated by a weak detector, may contain errors
or omissions. Use it as a reference but verify
against images.
3. Coordinate: Coordinate Origin (0,0) is Top-Left.
+X=Right, +Y=Down, corresponds to instantaneous
motion of objects in logs.

11

TABLE VI
D ETAILED SCORING RUBRIC FOR THE 12 EVALUATION METRICS ( SCORE RANGE : 1–10). I N THE EXAMPLES BELOW, E XCELLENT CORRESPONDS TO
SCORES OF 9–10, WHEREAS P OOR CORRESPONDS TO SCORES OF 1–2.

Metric

Evaluation Focus

Scoring Criteria Examples (Excellent vs. Poor)

1. Faithfulness-Step

Alignment with Ground Truth and Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs).
Completeness of reasoning regarding train status
and environment.
Prioritization of high-risk hazards (distinguishing
safe surroundings vs. intrusions).
Compliance with Railway General Operating
Rules and Signal Systems.
Interpretation of railway assets and spatial location of dynamic objects.

Excellent: All steps correctly match reference SOPs.
Poor: Majority of steps contradict ground truth.
Excellent: Captures all critical info (Signals, Switches).
Poor: Poor extraction of relevant reasoning.
Excellent: Prioritizes Emergency Braking for intrusions.
Poor: Misses obvious obstructions or critical signals.
Excellent: Fully compliant with signal aspects.
Poor: Promotes highly unsafe behavior (e.g., SPAD).
Excellent: Correctly distinguishes safe objects from intruders.
Poor: Misidentifies or ignores key objects.
Excellent: No redundancy, concise technical description.
Poor: Excessive redundancy, making reasoning unclear.
Excellent: No hallucinations; grounded in the rail domain.
Poor: Majority of reasoning is hallucinated.
Excellent: Nearly complete semantic coverage.
Poor: Very poor semantic coverage with major gaps.
Excellent: Acknowledges long braking distances and
horn use.
Poor: Suggests “Steering” or “Swerving” to avoid obstacles.
Excellent: No critical steps missing.
Poor: Response is highly incomplete with critical gaps.
Excellent: Highly specific (e.g., uses “Ballast”, “Pantograph”).
Poor: Largely irrelevant or uses generic driving terms.
Excellent: No significant details are missing.
Poor: Response is highly lacking in necessary details.

2. Informativeness-Step
3. Operational Risk Assess.
4. Signal & Rule Adhere.
5. Object Understanding

6. Repetition-Token
7. Hallucination

8. Semantic Coverage
9. Physics & Momentum

10. Missing Step
11. Relevance

12. Missing Details

Identification of unnecessary redundancy in the
generated reasoning.
Detection of irrelevant or invented reasoning steps
not aligned with visual facts.
Extent to which the response covers critical elements defined in the Ground Truth.
Understanding of train kinematics, 1-degree of
freedom, and braking inertia.

Evaluation of whether any necessary logical reasoning steps are omitted.
Specificity to the scenario and correct use of
railway terminology.
The extent to which critical contextual information is absent.

Response Format (CoT):
1. Perception → Reasoning → Planning → Final
Answer
2. Final Answer: Directly answer the user’s
question. If it is a multiple-choice question,
explicitly state the correct option.
Your answer must be especially concise,
professional, and focused on safety implications.
Defensive Prompting Mechanism:
When the perception log returns “No objects” for more than
80% of its entries, the system automatically injects the following critical warning into the user prompt, forcing the LMM to
leverage its zero-shot anomaly detection capabilities:
— AUTOMATED DETECTOR STATUS: UNRELIABLE —
System Report: The automated object detector found
NO standard targets (People/Cars).
CRITICAL WARNING: The detector often FAILS
to see non-standard obstacles (e.g., Bicycles, Rocks,
Debris).
INSTRUCTION: IGNORE the detector’s claim of
’No objects’. You MUST rely SOLELY on the Visual

Images to find anomalies. If you see something in
the image, TRUST THE IMAGE.
(III) P ROMPT FOR LLM- AS - A -J UDGE [47]
To rigorously evaluate the reasoning capabilities, we utilized
an LLM-as-a-Judge approach, which has been successfully
applied in DriveLMM-o1 [35]. The prompt defines 12 finegrained semantic metrics, shifting the evaluation paradigm
from simple n-gram matching to logic and safety-critical
assessment. The evaluator was instructed with a strict system
persona and the following scoring rubric (summarized in
Table VI).
System Prompt Instructions:
Avoid subjective interpretation and adhere to the
given thresholds. Do not add any additional explanations beyond the structured JSON output.
R EFERENCES
[1] W.-T. Hong, G. Clifton, and J. D. Nelson, “Railway accident causation analysis: Current approaches, challenges and potential solutions,”
Accident Analysis & Prevention, vol. 186, p. 107049, 2023.
[2] R. A. Khalil, Z. Safelnasr, N. Yemane, M. Kedir, A. Shafiqurrahman, and
N. Saeed, “Advanced learning technologies for intelligent transportation
systems: Prospects and challenges,” IEEE Open Journal of Vehicular
Technology, vol. 5, pp. 397–427, 2024.

12

[3] O. Zendel, M. Murschitz, M. Zeilinger, D. Steininger, S. Abbasi, and
C. Beleznai, “Railsem19: A dataset for semantic rail scene understanding,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition Workshops, 2019, pp. 0–0.
[4] R. Tagiew, P. Klasek, R. Tilly, M. Köppel, P. Denzler, P. Neumaier,
T. Klockau, M. Boekhoff, and K. Schwalbe, “Osdar23: Open sensor
data for rail 2023,” in 2023 8th International Conference on Robotics
and Automation Engineering (ICRAE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 270–276.
[5] R. Tagiew, I. Wunderlich, M. Sastuba, K. Göller, and S. Seitz, “Railgoerl24: Görlitz rail test center cv dataset 2024,” in 2025 IEEE Engineering
Reliable Autonomous Systems (ERAS). IEEE, 2025, pp. 1–4.
[6] Z. Liang, Y. Xu, Y. Hong, P. Shang, Q. Wang, Q. Fu, and K. Liu, “A
survey of multimodel large language models,” in Proceedings of the 3rd
international conference on computer, artificial intelligence and control
engineering, 2024, pp. 405–409.
[7] C. Corbiere, S. Roburin, S. Montariol, A. Bosselut, and A. Alahi,
“Retrieval-based interleaved visual chain-of-thought in real-world driving scenarios,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.04671, 2025.
[8] J.-B. Alayrac, J. Donahue, P. Luc, A. Miech, I. Barr, Y. Hasson, K. Lenc,
A. Mensch, K. Millican, M. Reynolds et al., “Flamingo: a visual
language model for few-shot learning,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 35, pp. 23 716–23 736, 2022.
[9] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, b. ichter, F. Xia, E. Chi,
Q. V. Le, and D. Zhou, “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in
large language models,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 35. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022, pp. 24 824–24 837.
[10] H. Liu, W. Xue, Y. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhao, K. Wang, L. Hou, R. Li, and
W. Peng, “A survey on hallucination in large vision-language models,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00253, 2024.
[11] Y. Li, Y. Du, K. Zhou, J. Wang, W. X. Zhao, and J.-R. Wen, “Evaluating
object hallucination in large vision-language models,” in Proceedings
of the 2023 conference on empirical methods in natural language
processing, 2023, pp. 292–305.
[12] Y. Chen, N. Zhu, Q. Wu, C. Wu, W. Niu, and Y. Wang, “Mrsi: A multimodal proximity remote sensing data set for environment perception in
rail transit,” International Journal of Intelligent Systems, vol. 37, no. 9,
pp. 5530–5556, 2022.
[13] W. Zhangyu, Y. Guizhen, W. Xinkai, L. Haoran, and L. Da, “A camera
and lidar data fusion method for railway object detection,” IEEE Sensors
Journal, vol. 21, no. 12, pp. 13 442–13 454, 2021.
[14] Q. Guo and J. Rambach, “Synrailobs: A synthetic dataset for obstacle
detection in railway scenarios,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.10784, 2025.
[15] H. Salmane, L. Khoudour, and Y. Ruichek, “A video-analysis-based
railway–road safety system for detecting hazard situations at level
crossings,” IEEE transactions on intelligent transportation systems,
vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 596–609, 2015.
[16] Z. Šilar and M. Dobrovolnỳ, “The obstacle detection on the railway
crossing based on optical flow and clustering,” in 2013 36th International Conference on Telecommunications and Signal Processing (TSP).
IEEE, 2013, pp. 755–759.
[17] Z. Cao, Y. Qin, Z. Xie, Q. Liu, E. Zhang, Z. Wu, and Z. Yu, “An effective
railway intrusion detection method using dynamic intrusion region and
lightweight neural network,” Measurement, vol. 191, p. 110564, 2022.
[18] Z. Wang and X. Du, “Yolo-rail: An improved yolo model for obstacle
detection on railway tracks,” IEEE Sensors Journal, 2026.
[19] Z. Zhang, P. Chen, Y. Huang, L. Dai, F. Xu, and H. Hu, “Railway
obstacle intrusion warning mechanism integrating yolo-based detection
and risk assessment,” Journal of Industrial Information Integration,
vol. 38, p. 100571, 2024.
[20] C. Chen, H. Qin, Y. Qin, and Y. Bai, “Real-time railway obstacle
detection based on multitask perception learning,” IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2025.
[21] W. Liu, Y. Wang, G. Yu, Z. Wang, and P. Chen, “Railfusion: A lidarcamera data interaction network for 3-d railway object detection,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2025.
[22] S. Antol, A. Agrawal, J. Lu, M. Mitchell, D. Batra, C. L. Zitnick, and
D. Parikh, “Vqa: Visual question answering,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on computer vision, 2015, pp. 2425–2433.
[23] H. Liu, C. Li, Q. Wu, and Y. J. Lee, “Visual instruction tuning,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 36, pp. 34 892–
34 916, 2023.
[24] J. Bai, S. Bai, S. Yang, S. Wang, S. Tan, P. Wang, J. Lin, C. Zhou, and
J. Zhou, “Qwen-vl: A versatile vision-language model for understanding,
localization,” Text Reading, and Beyond, vol. 2, no. 1, p. 1, 2023.
[25] O. Schumann, M. Hahn, N. Scheiner, F. Weishaupt, J. F. Tilly, J. Dickmann, and C. Wöhler, “Radarscenes: A real-world radar point cloud

data set for automotive applications,” in 2021 IEEE 24th International
Conference on Information Fusion (FUSION). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–8.
[26] L. Xu, H. Huang, and J. Liu, “Sutd-trafficqa: A question answering
benchmark and an efficient network for video reasoning over traffic
events,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, 2021, pp. 9878–9888.
[27] T. Qian, J. Chen, L. Zhuo, Y. Jiao, and Y.-G. Jiang, “Nuscenes-qa:
A multi-modal visual question answering benchmark for autonomous
driving scenario,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 38, no. 5, 2024, pp. 4542–4550.
[28] A.-M. Marcu, L. Chen, J. Hünermann, A. Karnsund, B. Hanotte,
P. Chidananda, S. Nair, V. Badrinarayanan, A. Kendall, J. Shotton
et al., “Lingoqa: Visual question answering for autonomous driving,” in
European Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 2024, pp. 252–
269.
[29] H. Tian, K. Reddy, Y. Feng, M. Quddus, Y. Demiris, and P. Angeloudis, “Large (vision) language models for autonomous vehicles:
Current trends and future directions,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 187–210, 2025.
[30] C. Sima, K. Renz, K. Chitta, L. Chen, H. Zhang, C. Xie, J. Beißwenger,
P. Luo, A. Geiger, and H. Li, “Drivelm: Driving with graph visual question answering,” in European conference on computer vision. Springer,
2024, pp. 256–274.
[31] X. Tian, J. Gu, B. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Zhao, K. Zhan, P. Jia, X. Lang,
and H. Zhao, “Drivevlm: The convergence of autonomous driving and
large vision-language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12289, 2024.
[32] Z. Xu, Y. Zhang, E. Xie, Z. Zhao, Y. Guo, K.-Y. K. Wong, Z. Li, and
H. Zhao, “Drivegpt4: Interpretable end-to-end autonomous driving via
large language model,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 9,
no. 10, pp. 8186–8193, 2024.
[33] Z. Huang, C. Feng, F. Yan, B. Xiao, Z. Jie, Y. Zhong, X. Liang,
and L. Ma, “Robotron-drive: All-in-one large multimodal model for
autonomous driving,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision, 2025, pp. 8011–8021.
[34] A. Wu and X. Luo, “Enhancing vision-language models for autonomous
driving through task-specific prompting and spatial reasoning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2510.24152, 2025.
[35] A. Ishaq, J. Lahoud, K. More, O. Thawakar, R. Thawkar, D. Dissanayake, N. Ahsan, Y. Li, F. S. Khan, H. Cholakkal et al., “Drivelmmo1: A step-by-step reasoning dataset and large multimodal model
for driving scenario understanding,” in 2025 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2025,
pp. 20 501–20 508.
[36] Y. Gao, M. Piccinini, Y. Zhang, D. Wang, K. Moller, R. Brusnicki,
B. Zarrouki, A. Gambi, J. F. Totz, K. Storms et al., “Foundation models
in autonomous driving: A survey on scenario generation and scenario
analysis,” IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems,
2026.
[37] Y. Chen, J. Zhao, and H. Han, “A survey on collaborative mechanisms between large and small language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.07460, 2025.
[38] S. Li, H. Wang, W. Xu, R. Zhang, S. Guo, J. Yuan, X. Zhong, T. Zhang,
and R. Li, “Collaborative inference and learning between edge slms and
cloud llms: A survey of algorithms, execution, and open challenges,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.16731, 2025.
[39] H. Guo, Y. Wang, Z. Ye, J. Dai, and Y. Xiong, “big. little vision transformer for efficient visual recognition,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.10267, 2024.
[40] C. Kelly, L. Hu, B. Yang, Y. Tian, D. Yang, C. Yang, Z. Huang,
Z. Li, J. Hu, and Y. Zou, “Visiongpt: Vision-language understanding agent using generalized multimodal framework,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.09027, 2024.
[41] Y. Liu, L. Qin, and S. Wang, “Small drafts, big verdict:
Information-intensive visual reasoning via speculation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.20812, 2025.
[42] G. Dai, S. Tang, and Y. Zhuang, “Kcm: Kan-based collaboration models
enhance pretrained large models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.20278,
2025.
[43] W. Chen, Z. Zhao, J. Yao, Y. Zhang, J. Bu, and H. Wang, “Multi-modal
medical diagnosis via large-small model collaboration,” in Proceedings
of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp.
30 763–30 773.
[44] Z. Sun, K. Guo, Y. Hu, D. Tian, Q. Gao, J. Wang, J. Gao, Y. Sun,
and B. Yin, “Large-small model synergy with multimodal fine-grained
heuristics for knowledge-based visual question answering,” in Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia, 2025,
pp. 935–944.

13

[45] M. Foutter, D. Gammelli, J. Kruger, E. Foss, P. Bhoj, T. Guffanti,
S. D’Amico, and M. Pavone, “Space-llava: a vision-language
model adapted to extraterrestrial applications,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.05924, 2024.
[46] S. Bai, Y. Cai, R. Chen, K. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Cheng, L. Deng,
W. Ding, C. Gao, C. Ge et al., “Qwen3-vl technical report,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2511.21631, 2025.
[47] L. Zheng, W.-L. Chiang, Y. Sheng, S. Zhuang, Z. Wu, Y. Zhuang, Z. Lin,
Z. Li, D. Li, E. Xing et al., “Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench
and chatbot arena,” Advances in neural information processing systems,
vol. 36, pp. 46 595–46 623, 2023.
[48] Y. Liu, D. Iter, Y. Xu, S. Wang, R. Xu, and C. Zhu, “G-eval: Nlg
evaluation using gpt-4 with better human alignment,” in Proceedings
of the 2023 conference on empirical methods in natural language
processing, 2023, pp. 2511–2522.
[49] J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, and A. Farhadi, “You only look
once: Unified, real-time object detection,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2016, pp. 779–
788.
[50] Y. Zhang, P. Sun, Y. Jiang, D. Yu, F. Weng, Z. Yuan, P. Luo, W. Liu,
and X. Wang, “Bytetrack: Multi-object tracking by associating every
detection box,” in European conference on computer vision. Springer,
2022, pp. 1–21.
[51] Z. Chen, J. Wu, W. Wang, W. Su, G. Chen, S. Xing, M. Zhong, Q. Zhang,
X. Zhu, L. Lu et al., “Internvl: Scaling up vision foundation models
and aligning for generic visual-linguistic tasks,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2024,
pp. 24 185–24 198.
[52] J. Chi, U. Karn, H. Zhan, E. Smith, J. Rando, Y. Zhang, K. Plawiak, Z. D.
Coudert, K. Upasani, and M. Pasupuleti, “Llama guard 3 vision: Safeguarding human-ai image understanding conversations,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.10414, 2024.
[53] Z. Zhou, X. Ning, K. Hong, T. Fu, J. Xu, S. Li, Y. Lou, L. Wang,
Z. Yuan, X. Li et al., “A survey on efficient inference for large language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14294, 2024.

Sen Zhang is currently studying at the School of Automation and Intelligent
Systems of Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China. His current research
interests include large-scale language models and embodied intelligence.

Runmei Li received the Ph.D. degree from Institute of Automation, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2005. She is currently a Professor
and Associate Dean with the School of Automation and Intelligent Systems,
Beijing Jiaotong University. Her research interests include control engineering,
artificial intelligence, and intelligent traffic.

Shizhuang Deng received the M.Eng. degree in Software Engineering from
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China, in 2026. He is currently
a Ph.D. candidate of Software Engineering with the School of Software
Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University. His current research
interests include Retrieval-Augmented Generation, large model reasoning and
decision-making, and multi-agent collaboration.

Zhichao Zheng is currently studying at the School of Automation and
Intelligent Systems of Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China. His current
research interests include large language models and multi-agent planning.

Yuhe Zhang is currently studying at the school of Automation and Intelligent
Systems, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China. His current research interests include intelligent control and knowledge-enhanced intelligent systems.

Jiani Li is currently studying at the school of Automation and Intelligent
Systems, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China. Her current research
interests include emdodied intelligence and embodied question answering.

Kailun Zhang is currently studying at the school of Automation and Intelligent Systems, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China. His current research interests include knowledge-driven intelligent systems and autonomous
decision-making.

Tao Zhang received Ph.D. degree in Software Engineering from Northwestern
Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China, in 2006. He is currently employed at
Northwestern Polytechnical University as a professor. His research interests
include artificial intelligence and decision systems.

Wenjun Wu received Ph.D. degree in Computer Science from Beihang
University, Beijing, China, in 2001. He is currently employed at Beihang
University as a professor. His research interests include pre-trained model,
deep learning, cloud computing.

Qunbo Wang received Ph.D. degree in Software Engineering from Beihang
University, Beijing, China, in 2022. He is currently serving as an associate
professor at Beijing Jiaotong University. His research interests include pretrained model, machine learning, and embodied AI.

